---
layout: post
title: "A different kind of Set"
---

Here's a different way of implementing a Set in Swift:

```swift
struct Set<Element: Equatable> {
    var contains: (Element) -> Bool
}
```

You can initialize an instance like this:

```swift
let set = Set<Int> { $0 == 42 }
```

And test for membership like so:

```swift
set.contains(42) // returns true
set.contains(43) // returns false
```

And while it lacks some very useful features we expect from a typical Set, because it can't iterate over its members, our Set also has some tricks up its sleeve:

```swift
let allEvenNumbers = Set<Int> { $0 % 2 == 0 }

allEvenNumbers.contains(2) // returns true
allEvenNumbers.contains(224243532) // returns true
allEvenNumbers.contains(224243533) // returns false
```

That's how easy it is to define a set containig all even numbers in existence, a set of infinite size.

How about mutation? That can be done by updating `contains` with an additional condition:

```swift
extension Set {
    mutating func insert(_ element: Element) {
        let _contains = contains
        contains = { $0 == element || _contains($0) }
    }
    
    mutating func remove(_ element: Element) {
        let _contains = contains
        contains = { $0 != element && _contains($0) }
    }
}
```

It's funny to me that adding uses the logical OR operator, while removing is done using the AND operator. It probably has something to do with algebra. I wouldn't be able to explain why.

I _do_ know that it allows us to create a set with a size of infinity minus one:

```swift
var manyNumbers = Set<Int> { $0 % 2 == 0 }
manyNumbers.remove(42)

manyNumbers.contains(40) // returns true
manyNumbers.contains(42) // returns false
manyNumbers.contains(44) // returns true
```

## Epilogue
As I'm writing this, I find myself thinking about it some more. That's always a risk, because if I can't find the words to put these thoughts to paper, this blogpost will never see the light of day.

I was thinking about how this Set would fit in Swift's standard library. Quite badly, it seems. It represents a collection, but it can't conform to the `Collection` protocol. It can't even conform to `Sequence`, since that requires sequential access to its elements. In the standard library, all collections must be iterable. Does that mean that if something is not iterable, it's not a collection? Or is our Set here an example of a different kind of collection that the standard library does not accomodate for?
